# initrd-ng

This directory contains the code to build and analyze a bootable `initrd.lua` image from the [`sys`](../sys) directory.


## Usage

Run `cargo run --release -- build --sysroot ../sys --output <output.lua>` from this directory. Note that in development, unless you're debugging `initrd` itself, you can often just symlink or bind-mount `sys` into the computer's filesystem in your local Minecraft instance, without rebuilding `initrd`.

Run `cargo run --release -- analyze --sysroot ../sys` from this directory to see how much bytes you will gain if you drop various files from sysroot.


## Design

The generated `initrd.lua` file is fundamentally "just" a compressed blob concatenated with an inline decoder that decompresses the data and executes it as code. The compressed code contains a table literal describing the contents of the [`sys`](../sys) directory in the [`tmpfs`](../sys/packages/tmpfs) format, as well as the [`vfs`](../sys/packages/vfs) and [`tmpfs`](../sys/packages/vfs) drivers needed to mount it, and passes control to `sys/startup.lua`. Nothing tricky here.

The less obvious part is the choice of a custom compression format as opposed to, say, using [Luz](https://github.com/MCJack123/Luz) or [LibDeflate](https://github.com/SafeteeWoW/LibDeflate/blob/main/LibDeflate.lua). The main reason for this is that the image needs to be self-contained, and so the size of the decoder matters. Encoding metadata as Lua literals is thus almost always better than compressing it optimally and then wasting space to decode it.

We use a `bzip`-like format. The plan is that `initrd.lua` should fit on a 125 KB floppy disk, and we're quite close to the limit. So it's better to use a compressor that can implement the required compression ratio, and among all popular formats, `bzip` compresses text and code the best (even better than `zstd`). It's not the fastest to decode, but it's very competitive in its class: our `initrd` currently boots in 0.6s, which is perfectly acceptable (for comparison, LibDeflate is about twice as fast, and Luz could be even faster).

Over time, we've diverged from `bzip` to improve compression rate, decompression time, and/or decoder size. The format is still relatively simple, but it's worth documenting in prose.


## Format

The compression pipeline is [BWT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Burrows–Wheeler_transform), followed by [SRC](https://purplesyringa.moe/blog/sorted-rank-coding/) and [RLE0](https://www.algorithmic-solutions.info/leda_manual/RLE0Coder.html), followed by an [rANS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asymmetric_numeral_systems#Range_variants_(rANS)_and_streaming) coder with multiple static tables.

We use a single block and don't emit headers -- all relevant metadata is directly substituted into the decoder. We don't have a EOF symbol in the ANS alphabet, instead we store the file length.

We omit the RLE/LZP steps prior to BWT because they don't help much, but waste time and decoder space.

We use [cyclic BWT instead of suffix BWT](https://purplesyringa.moe/blog/suffix-bwt-vs-cyclic-shift-bwt-and-fast-computation/) because it's cheaper to decode.

[Compared to `bzip2`](https://github.com/dsnet/compress/blob/master/doc/bzip2-format.pdf), we use SRC instead of MTF for better compression rate. We don't optimize the last occurrence of the symbol in any way.

RLE0 stays exactly the same. We map RUNA and RUNB to symbols 0 and 1 respectively, meaning that MTF/SRC ranks start at 2: this agrees with Lua's 1-based indexing.

We use rANS instead of Huffman because rANS is cheaper to decode in Lua (rANS requires rare aligned 32-bit loads, while Huffman requires either many unaligned reads or manually tracking bits) and offers a better compression rate as a bonus. To decode rANS, we generate a heuristically optimal binary search tree from the frequencies and compile it to Lua code in runtime, saving on space while also maintaining performance. We avoid tANS because we can't build tANS tables in reasonable time while keeping high quality.

We don't have adaptive coding. Instead, we add symbols to the ANS alphabet for switching between one of six frequency tables, generated by the encoder. This is similar to how `bzip2` allows Huffman trees to be switched every 50 bytes, but more optimal.


## Improvements

Here are some ideas for further improvements.

1. Apply a Lua-specific filter for modeling indentation. Simply removing it saves 3% in compressed data, good enough modeling should be able to save 2%.

2. Generate the six stored frequency tables more optimally; they are currently seemingly underutilized.

3. Skip BWT and go full CM. Even simple [bsc](https://github.com/IlyaGrebnov/libbsc)-style models with [QLFC](https://sci-hub.ru/10.1109/dcc.2005.75) take an unreasonably long time to decode despite not significantly improving compression, but there may be models that produce good enough results without having to waste time on BWT.

4. Alternatively, [GLZA](https://encode.su/threads/1909-Tree-alpha-v0-1-download) seems to compress both better and faster than BWT.
